Add file system usage documentation [ENG-148] (#156)
aai-institute/lakefs-spec: docs/guides/usage.md

# How to use the lakeFS file system

This guide contains instructions and code snippets on how to use the lakeFS file system.

## The lakeFS URI structure

In the following subsections, we frequently make use of [lakeFS URIs](https://docs.lakefs.io/understand/model.html#lakefs-protocol-uris) in the example code.

> lakeFS URIs are strings identifying resources in a lakeFS deployment through a unique combination of repository name, lakeFS revision/ref name, and file name relative to the repository root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lakeFS URIs identify resources in a lakeFS deployment through a unique path consisting of repository name, lakeFS revision/ref name, and file name relative to the repository root.
```

Author: Fixed in [13917c0](https://github.com/aai-institute/lakefs-spec/pull/156/commits/13917c064afc3816ce4cca9787ebb3ad784d3c98).

> As an example, a URI like `repo/main/file.txt` addresses the `file.txt` file on the `main` branch in the repository named `repo`.

Reviewer: That's actually a bit un-ergonomic API on our part: while you can use the full URL (including the `lakefs://` scheme), the same can't be used as an rpath. Do you think it would make sense to optionally allow this kind of URI as well?

Technically, the form without the scheme isn't an URI at all (the scheme part is mandatory), so we should call it differently.

> `URI = scheme ":" ["//" authority] path ["?" query] ["#" fragment]`

Author: I think the majority of APIs also allow full URIs with scheme (those are stripped away in `_strip_protocol`). However, handling is inconsistent as you say, and we should canonicalize this actually. (Maybe extend the parsing regex to work on `lakefs://`-prefixed paths, too?)

Reviewer: That's what I had in mind, I just don't have all the edge cases in mind right now where this might cause problems. Can you maybe check what the other implementations (`s3fs`, ...) allow?

Author: s3fs for one parses the bucket and resource names after stripping the protocol, so maybe calling `_strip_protocol` in the `parse` routine is the way to go here.

In some lakeFS file system operations, directories are also allowed as resource names.

> For example, the URI `repo/main/data/` addresses the `data` directory on the `main` branch in the `repo` repository.

Author: Done in [13917c0](https://github.com/aai-institute/lakefs-spec/pull/156/commits/13917c064afc3816ce4cca9787ebb3ad784d3c98).

## Uploading and downloading files

> The arguably most important feature of the file system are file transfers.

Author: Fixed in [13917c0](https://github.com/aai-institute/lakefs-spec/pull/156/commits/13917c064afc3816ce4cca9787ebb3ad784d3c98).

    ```python
    fs = LakeFSFileSystem()
    
    fs.put_file("my-repo/my-ref/file.txt", "file.txt", use_blockstore=True)
    ```

    Direct lakeFS blockstore uploads require the installation of the corresponding `fsspec` file system implementation through `pip`.
    For an S3-based lakeFS deployment, install the `s3fs` package. For Google Cloud Storage (GCS), install the `gcsfs` package.
    For Azure blob storage, install the `adlfs` package.

### File downloads

To download a file, you can use the `fs.get()` or `fs.get_file()` methods:

```python
from lakefs_spec import LakeFSFileSystem

fs = LakeFSFileSystem()

# remote path, then local target path.
fs.get_file("my-repo/my-ref/file.txt", "file.txt")
```

In the case of a directory in lakeFS, use the `fs.get()` API together with the `recursive=True` switch:

```python
# structure:
#   dir/a.txt
#      /b.yaml
#      /c.csv
#      /...

# downloads `dir` into the current directory.
fs.get("my-repo/my-ref/dir", "dir", recursive=True)
```

## Obtaining info on stored objects

> To query (also called `stat`) a single object in a lakeFS repository, use the `fs.info()` API:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To query the metadata of a single object in a lakeFS repository (similar to the POSIX `stat` function), use the `fs.info()` API:
```

```python
from lakefs_spec import LakeFSFileSystem

fs = LakeFSFileSystem()

my_file_info = fs.info("my-repo/my-ref/my-file.txt")
```

The resulting `my_file_info` object is a dictionary containing useful information such as storage location of the file, creation timestamp, and size (in bytes).

You can also call `fs.info()` on directories:

```python
dir_info = fs.info("my-repo/my-ref/dir/")
```

In this case, the resulting `dir_info` object only contains the directory name, and the cumulated size of the files it contains.

## Listing directories in lakeFS

To list the files in a directory in lakeFS, use the `fs.ls()` method:

```python
from lakefs_spec import LakeFSFileSystem

fs = LakeFSFileSystem()

my_dir_listing = fs.ls("my-repo/my-ref/my-dir/")
```

This returns a list of Python dictionaries containing information on the objects contained in the requested directory.
The returned objects have the same fields set as those returned by a normal `fs.info()` call on a file object.

## Deleting objects from a lakeFS branch

> To delete objects from a lakeFS branch, use the `fs.rm_file()` or `fs.rm()` APIs. As before, while the former works only for single files, the latter can be used to remove whole directories with the `recursive=True` option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To delete objects from a lakeFS branch, use the `fs.rm_file()` or `fs.rm()` APIs. As before, while the former works only for single files, the latter can be used to remove entire directories with the `recursive=True` option.
```

Author: Also fixed in [13917c0](https://github.com/aai-institute/lakefs-spec/pull/156/commits/13917c064afc3816ce4cca9787ebb3ad784d3c98).

```python
from lakefs_spec import LakeFSFileSystem

fs = LakeFSFileSystem()

fs.rm_file("my-repo/my-branch/my-file.txt")

# removes the whole `my-dir` directory.
fs.rm("my-repo/my-branch/my-dir/", recursive=True)
```

> When removing files or directories from a branch, those removal operations are staged changes until another commit is created. 

Reviewer: While this is correct, it also applies to all of the other operations as well.

I'd turn this remark into an admonition towards the beginning of the page (since it might catch the reader off-guard, who might expect these operations to create commits; compare [#128](https://github.com/aai-institute/lakefs-spec/issues/128)).

Maybe that admonition is also a good place to link to the description of the transaction feature (once that page is written), since it addresses the same concern.

Author: Added a subsection (not admonition) in [13917c0](https://github.com/aai-institute/lakefs-spec/pull/156/commits/13917c064afc3816ce4cca9787ebb3ad784d3c98).

This is arguably more what we want, since it applies to all stateful file operations, it deserves its own section (which also captures the reader's attention, and thus informs them of it).

I couldn't fit the admonition anywhere to my liking, if you have a suggestion, let me know.

> ## Copying files between branches

Reviewer: This also applies to copying files within a branch, right?

Author: Yes, I added info and a code example of a copy to a branch in [13917c0](https://github.com/aai-institute/lakefs-spec/pull/156/commits/13917c064afc3816ce4cca9787ebb3ad784d3c98).

# How to use the lakeFS file system

This guide contains instructions and code snippets on how to use the lakeFS file system.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a note somewhere in the introduction on the structure of `rpath`s (i.e., `[repo]/[ref]/...`), so the user understands them whenever they occur in a method signature?

## Uploading and downloading files

The arguably most important feature of the file system are file transfers.

### File uploads

> To upload a file, you can use the `fs.put()` and `fs.put_file` methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To upload a file, you can use the `fs.put()` and `fs.put_file()` methods:
```

Reviewer: As a user, this paragraph doesn't make the difference between these two methods clear. Can you elaborate a bit?

Author: Added a sentence on the distinction in [8ca0a64](https://github.com/aai-institute/lakefs-spec/pull/156/commits/8ca0a64d1045e89f9db40f7f03c6f693f2f3891a).

Since the distinction is largely (or only?) the `recursive` switch, we could also decide to advertise the `get()`, `put()`, `copy()`, and `rm()` bulk operations - your call.

Reviewer: I like the new version, let's keep it!

```python
from lakefs_spec import LakeFSFileSystem

fs = LakeFSFileSystem()

# remote path, then local target path.
fs.put_file("file.txt", "my-repo/my-ref/file.txt")
```

> If you want to upload a whole directory to lakeFS, use the `fs.put` API together with the `recursive=True` switch:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to upload an entire directory to lakeFS, you can use the `fs.put()` API together with the `recursive=True` switch:
```

Author: Changed all occurrences of `whole` to `entire` in [13917c0](https://github.com/aai-institute/lakefs-spec/pull/156/commits/13917c064afc3816ce4cca9787ebb3ad784d3c98).

```python
# structure:
#   dir/a.txt
#      /b.yaml
#      /c.csv
#      /...

from lakefs_spec import LakeFSFileSystem

fs = LakeFSFileSystem()

# creates the target directory `dir` in the current directory.
fs.put("dir", "my-repo/my-ref/dir", recursive=True)
```

!!! info

    This method of file uploading results in two transfers: Once from the client to the lakeFS server, and once from the lakeFS server to the object storage.

>     This can impact performance if very large files are uploaded frequently. To avoid this performance hit, you can also decide to write the file directly to the underlying object storage:

Reviewer: Only once can be enough, if the files are large enough :sweat_smile:

```suggestion
    This can impact performance if very large files are uploaded. To avoid this performance hit, you can also decide to write the file directly to the underlying object storage:
```

Author: Fixed in [8ca0a64](https://github.com/aai-institute/lakefs-spec/pull/156/commits/8ca0a64d1045e89f9db40f7f03c6f693f2f3891a).

    ```python
    fs = LakeFSFileSystem()
    
    # remote path, then local target path.
    fs.put_file("my-repo/my-ref/file.txt", "file.txt", use_blockstore=True)
    ```

>     Direct lakeFS blockstore uploads require the installation of the corresponding file system implementation through `pip`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Direct lakeFS blockstore uploads require the installation of the corresponding `fsspec` file system implementation through `pip`.
```

Author: Fixed in [8ca0a64](https://github.com/aai-institute/lakefs-spec/pull/156/commits/8ca0a64d1045e89f9db40f7f03c6f693f2f3891a).

    For an S3-based lakeFS deployment, install the `s3fs` package. For Google Cloud Storage (GCS), install the `gcsfs` package.
    For Azure blob storage, install the `adlfs` package.

### File downloads

> To download a file, you can use the `fs.get()` or `fs.get_file` methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To download a file, you can use the `fs.get()` or `fs.get_file()` methods:
```

Reviewer: Same as above, what's the difference between the two?

```python
from lakefs_spec import LakeFSFileSystem

fs = LakeFSFileSystem()

# remote path, then local target path.
fs.get_file("my-repo/my-ref/file.txt", "file.txt")
```

> In case of a directory in lakeFS, use the `fs.get` API together with the `recursive=True` switch:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of a directory in lakeFS, use the `fs.get` API together with the `recursive=True` switch:
```
